BUG.md, before:

# Bugs

Solved: 12/19

- [ ] Pointer to struct displayed as "long long*". (no name field in elem_ckind)
- [ ] Struct elements pollute the global scope with non-existent variables.
- [ ] Cannot call function as struct method with only one arg.
- [ ] Function declarations do not work inside macros (fails signature check).
- [X] Macro-related bug (check `expand_macro`).
- [X] `ma_cnt` builtin is no longer working.
- [ ] Div/Mod bug (Doesn't check `in_reg` == `rax`)
- [X] Implicit cast arr-ptr/ref doesn't work (Def.type_compatible).
- [X] Passing arguments from variadic macro to fun doesn't work.
- [ ] Assignment/At-related bug (also in macros) (`"15" = 5`/`"15" at (12 + 1)`).
- [X] Cannot call function as a function param.
- [X] No type checking for reference and dereference (`*bool = int64`).
- [X] Faulty load before an assignment (div).
- [X] Assignment of array rvalue to ptr type
- [X] `nr % 10 + '0'` fails due to widen.
- [X] No non-int64 ptrs/arrays due to arr_type and ptr_type.
- [X] Save registers before calling a function.
- [X] *cstr results in a int64, not int8.
- [X] Add declared variables to fun's offset.
- [X] References aren't working.

Commit message:

Added documentation for stdlib/c/cstdarg, stdlib/print; Fixed bug in function declaration (alias in arg type).

BUG.md, after:

# Bugs

Solved: 12/20

- [ ] The type of an overloaded function with a diff type than the first takes the type of the first overloaded function
- [ ] Pointer to struct displayed as "long long*". (no name field in elem_ckind)
- [ ] Struct elements pollute the global scope with non-existent variables.
- [ ] Cannot call function as struct method with only one arg.
- [ ] Function declarations do not work inside macros (fails signature check).
- [X] Macro-related bug (check `expand_macro`).
- [X] `ma_cnt` builtin is no longer working.
- [ ] Div/Mod bug for asm backend (Doesn't check `in_reg` == `rax`)
- [X] Implicit cast arr-ptr/ref doesn't work (Def.type_compatible).
- [X] Passing arguments from variadic macro to fun doesn't work.
- [ ] Assignment/At-related bug (also in macros) (`"15" = 5`/`"15" at (12 + 1)`).
- [X] Cannot call function as a function param.
- [X] No type checking for reference and dereference (`*bool = int64`).
- [X] Faulty load before an assignment (div).
- [X] Assignment of array rvalue to ptr type
- [X] `nr % 10 + '0'` fails due to widen.
- [X] No non-int64 ptrs/arrays due to arr_type and ptr_type.
- [X] Save registers before calling a function.
- [X] *cstr results in a int64, not int8.
- [X] Add declared variables to fun's offset.
- [X] References aren't working.
